The disruptive eects of the COVID-19 outbreak have impacted almost all sectors of our society. Higher
education is no exception. Anecdotal evidence paints a bleak picture for both students and universities.
According to the American Council on Education, enrollment is likely to drop by 15% in the fall of 2020,
while at the same time many institutions may have to confront demands for large tuition cuts if classes
remain virtual.1In a similar vein, students face an increasingly uncertain environment, where nancial and
health shocks (for example, lack of resources to complete their studies or fear of becoming seriously sick),
along with the transition to online learning may have aected their academic performance, educational plans,
current labor market participation, and expectations about future employment.
This paper attempts to shed light on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on college students. First,
we describe and quantify the causal eects of the COVID-19 outbreak on a wide set of students' out-
comes/expectations. In particular, we analyze enrollment and graduation decisions, academic performance,
major choice, study and social habits, remote learning experiences, current labor market participation,
and expectations about future employment. Second, we study how these eects dier along existing so-
cioeconomic divides, and whether the pandemic has exacerbated existing inequalities. Finally, we present
suggestive evidence on the mechanisms behind the heterogeneous COVID-19 eects by quantifying the role
of individual-level nancial and health shocks on academic decisions and labor market expectations.
For this purpose, we surveyed about 1,500 undergraduate students at Arizona State University (ASU),
one of the largest public universities in the United States, in late April 2020. The fact that ASU is a large
and highly diverse institution makes our ndings relevant for most public institutions in the country. The
survey was explicitly designed to not only collect student outcomes and expectations after the onset of the
pandemic, but also to recover counterfactual outcomes in the absence of the outbreak. Specically, the survey
asked students about their current experiences/expectations and what those experiences/expectations would
have been had it not been for the pandemic. Because we collect information conditional on both states of
the world (with the COVID-19 pandemic, and without) from each student , we can directly analyze how
each student believes COVID-19 has impacted their current and future outcomes.2For example, by asking
students about their current GPA in a post-COVID-19 world and their expected GPA in the absence of
COVID-19, we can back out the subjective treatment eect of COVID-19 on academic performance. The
credibility of our approach depends on: (1) students having well-formed beliefs about outcomes in the
counterfactual scenario. This is a plausible assumption in our context since the counterfactual state is a
1See, the New York Times article \After Coronavirus, Colleges Worry: Will Students Come Back?" (April 15, 2020) for a
discussion surrounding students' demands for tuition cuts.
2In some cases, instead of asking students for the outcomes in both states of the world, we directly ask for the dierence.
For example, the survey asked how the pandemic had aected the student's graduation date.
realistic and relevant one - it was the status quo less than two months before the survey, and (2) there being
no systematic bias in the reporting of the data - an assumption that is implicitly made when using any
Our ndings on academic outcomes indicate that COVID-19 has led to a large number of students delaying
graduation (13%), withdrawing from classes (11%), and intending to change majors (12%). Moreover,
approximately 50% of our sample separately reported a decrease in study hours and in their academic
performance. The data also show that while all subgroups of the population have experienced negative
eects due to the outbreak, the size of the eects is heterogeneous. For example, compared to their higher-
income counterparts, lower-income students (those with below-median parental income) are substantially
more likely to delay graduation. Finally, we nd that students report a decrease in their likelihood of taking
online classes as a result of their recent experiences. These eects are, however, more than 150% larger for
honors students, suggesting that, a priori, most engaged students strongly prefer in-person classes.
As expected, the COVID-19 outbreak also had large negative eects on students' current labor market
participation and expectations about post-college labor outcomes. Working students suered a 31% decrease
in their wages and a 37% drop in weekly hours worked, on average. Moreover, around 40% of students lost
a job, internship, or a job oer, and 61% reported to have a family member that experienced a reduction
in income. The pandemic also had a substantial impact on students' expectations about their labor market
prospects post-college. For example, their perceived probability of nding a job decreased by almost 20%,
and their expected earnings when 35 years old (around 15 years from the outbreak) declined by approximately
2.5%. This last nding suggests that students expect the pandemic to have a long-lasting impact on their
labor market prospects.
We nd that the substantial variation in the impact of COVID-19 on students tracked with existing
socioeconomic divides. For example, compared to their more auent peers, lower-income students are 55%
more likely to delay graduation due to COVID-19 and are 41% more likely to report that COVID-19 impacted
their major choice. Further, COVID-19 nearly doubled the gap between higher- and lower-income students'
expected GPA.4There also is substantial variation in the pandemic's eect on preference for online learning,
with Honors students and males revising their preferences down by more than 2.5 times as much as their
peers. However, despite appearing to be more disrupted by the switch to online learning, the impact of
COVID-19 on Honors students' academic outcomes is consistently smaller than the impact on non-Honors
3This approach has been used successfully in several other settings, such as to construct career and family returns to
college majors (Arcidiacono et al., 2020; Wiswall and Zafar, 2018), and the causal impact of health on retirement (Shapiro and
4The income gap in GPA increased from 0.052 to 0.098 on a 4 point scale. It is signicant at the 1% level in both scenarios.

References
down by more than 2.5 times as much as their
peers. However, despite appearing to be more disrupted by the switch to online learning, the impact of
COVID-19 on Honors students' academic outcomes is consistently smaller than the impact on non-Honors
students.
3This approach has been used successfully in several other settings, such as to construct career and family returns to
college majors (Arcidiacono et al., 2020; Wiswall and Zafar, 2018), and the causal impact of health on retirement (Shapiro and
Giustinelli, 2019)
4The income gap in GPA increased from 0.052 to 0.098 on a 4 point scale. It is signicant at the 1% level in both scenarios.
3